\doc

TITLE. Small mammal species composition data for Niwot Ridge, 1981 - 1990.

ABSTRACT. Small mammals were live trapped during the summer of each year at various locations on Niwot Ridge. Species trapped included pikas (Ochotona princeps), marmots (Marmota flaviventris), deer mice (Peromyscus maniculatus), voles (Microtus longicaudus, Microtus montanus, and Phenacomys intermedius), and pocket gophers (Thomomys talpoides). Pocket gophers were only trapped through the summer of 1983. Mice and voles were trapped using Sherman traps, while Tomahawk traps were used to trap both the pikas and marmots. Sherman gopher traps were used to trap gophers. The mice and vole traps were placed 10 meters apart in parallel rows in grids containing from 25 to 100 traps. Weather permitting, the traps were placed for 3 consecutive nights every 1 or 2 weeks from June to August. The pikas, marmots, and gophers were trapped during a 10-day census period beginning around 15 August of each year. The traps were selectively placed in areas where evidence of the animals existed. In the case of the pocket gophers, the traps were placed below ground in active mounds. The traps were set during the day, and traplines were run every 2 hours. Consult the appropriate figures in Halfpenny et al. (1984; 1987) for these trap locations, as well as descriptions of baiting and handling techniques and surrounding vegetation communities. After determining and recording the species, gender, age, reproductive status, weight, health, and trap location, the animals were permanently tagged and released. 

INVESTIGATOR. Jim Halfpenny, P.O. Box 989, 300 Scott, Gardiner, MT, 59030, (406) 848-9458.

VARIABLES. identification number, weight, sex, reproductive status, age, species, condition.

KEYWORDS. mammal, herbivore, deer mouse, Peromyscus maniculatus, marmot, Marmota flaviventris, pika, Ochotona princeps, vole, Mictrotus longicaudus, Microtus montanus, Phenacomys intermedius, pocket gopher, Thomomys talpoides, animal, species composition, populations, Niwot Ridge LTER, NWT, weight, reproductive status, age, condition, habitat, saddle, C1

LOCATION. The study area was Niwot Ridge. Collections are stored at the Mountain Research Station and original data are stored with the NWT LTER data manager.

TIMING. begin summer 1981, end summer 1990, yearly.

CITATIONS.[1]Halfpenny, J.C., and K.P. Ingraham. 1983. Growth and development of heather voles. Growth 47: 437-445.
[2]Halfpenny, J.C., K.P. Ingraham, C.H. Southwick, S.C. Golian, H.L. Hause, and C. Meany. 1984. Ecological data on small mammal herbivores from the Colorado alpine tundra, 1981-1983. University of Colorado Long-Term Ecological Research Data Report 84/7. 63 pp.
[3]Whitworth, M.R., and C.H. Southwick. 1984. Sex differences in the ontogeny of social behavior in pikas: Possible relationships to dispersal and territoriality. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 15: 175-182.
[4]Golian, S.C., and M.R. Whitworth. 1985. Growth of pikas (Ochotona princeps) in Colorado. Journal of Mammalogy 66: 367-371.
[5]Southwick, C.H., S.C. Golian, M.R. Whitworth, J.C. Halfpenny, and R. Brown. 1986. Population density and fluctuations of pikas (Ochotona princeps) in Colorado. Journal of Mammalogy 67: 149-153.
[6]Auerbach, N.A., J.C. Halfpenny, and M.D. Taylor. 1987. Ecological data on small mammal herbivores from the Colorado alpine tundra, 1984-1987. University of Colorado Long-Term Ecological Research Data Report 87/9. 67 pp.
[7]Brown, R.N., C.H. Southwick, and S.C. Golian. 1989. Male-female spacing, territorial replacement, and the mating system in pikas (Ochotona princeps). Journal of Mammalogy 70: 622-627.
[8]Halfpenny, J.C. 1992. Environmental impacts of powdertracking using fluorescent pigments. Journal of Mammalogy 73: 680-682.
 
METHODS. These data were manually entered from the original live specimen cards by NWT LTER data management personnel. 
The cards had been completed from 1981 through 1990, but computer entry of the data in this file was done during the spring of 1994. The cards contained comments which were of such a variety that it was not feasible for all of them to be entered in a semi-quantitative manner. Moreover, because of the extensive lag between the collection and computer entry times of these data, it was difficult to ensure that proper interpretations had been made during data entry. Wherever possible both general and specific interpretations made by data entry personnel have been documented elsewhere in this section of this file. For these reasons, it behooves the user of these data to read the comments in this section carefully, as well as to consult both the original live specimen cards and the citations (particularly Halfpenny et al. 1984; 1987) listed above. Live specimen cards were only completed when a trap captured an animal. The total number of trapping attempts often varied, depending on such variables as the grids used, the species targeted, and the year. Halfpenny et al. (1984; 1987) should be consulted for details on trapping attempts and summary information on trapping success. These should also be referenced for details concerning specific trap locations and the various surrounding vegetation communities.
The following are general comments regarding the entry of the data on the live specimen cards:
The cards were provided in a large box by Jim Halfpenny in the spring of 1993. The cards were generally grouped (by rubber bands) into bundles organized (and often labelled as such by a "sticky" note) by species and year. Data for animals trapped in Arapaho Basin were not entered at all.
Each live specimen card had fields for collector, date, sex, species, number, wt (gm), age (adult, subadult, juvenile), males testes position (abdominal, inguinal, scrotal), females vagina (imperforate, perforate, plug), females pregnant, females nipples (small, medium, large, lactating), condition of animal, other [comments], location (S[ection], T[ownship], R[ange]), county, state, grid, trap #, and habitat.
The following are general comments regarding entry of data contained in fields on the cards:
A "1" was entered for any fields that were checked (i.e., adult, subadult, juvenile, abdominal, inguinal, scrotal, imperforate, perforate, plug, pregnant, small, medium, large, lactating). Thus, a "1" in any of the corresponding columns in the data section indicates that the animal was positive for that characteristic. Similarly, whenever the word "probably" was used in one of these fields on the card, a "1" was entered for that field (e.g., the word 'probably' in the pregnant field on the card was interpreted to indicate that the animal was pregnant). The absence of a value in the corresponding columns in the data section indicates that the field was not checked or that a "?" appeared in the field on the card. If a field on the card was checked and the mark was followed by a "?", however, then a "1" was entered for that field. The absence of a value in one of these columns in the data section can represent a) the lack of the particular characteristic or b) missing data, since there was no way for data entry personnel to make this distinction from the live specimen cards. An arrow from a field that had been checked to a field which had not, was assumed to indicate that the original check mark had been misplaced. Thus, if the subadult field had been checked and an arrow was drawn from that field to the adult field on the card, a "1" was entered for the adult (not the subadult) field during data entry.
The following are general comments with regard to entries associated with the collector field:
Collector's names were entered as they appeared on the live specimen card with the following exceptions. If the name exceeded 6 characters, it was truncated. If both the given and surnames were listed, the surname was entered. If the name of more than one person was listed, the first person listed was entered. If the same person completed cards for several animals in succession, but recorded a different form of the name (e.g., initials) in the collector field, then the form of the name that was entered for the first such card was entered for all of the subsequent cards. The following list includes the full name of the collector as deduced from handwriting, card sequences, and Halfpenny et al. (1984; 1987). The collector codes are listed parenthetically, with individual collector codes separated by commas: Rick Adams (ADAMS), Nancy A. Auerbach (AUERBA), S. Beaupre (BEAUPR), Rick Brown (RICK, BROWN, RNB, RICKB), Dan Blumstein (BLUMST), Todd Esque (ESQUE), Debbie Fleischer (DEB, DEBBY, DEBBIE, FLEISC), Bonnie Gilbert (GILBER, BONNIE), Steven C. Golian (STEVE, GOLIAN, SCG), James C. Halfpenny (JIMH, JIM, HALFPE, JH), Jeff Hardesty (HARDES), Heather L. Hause (HAUSE), Kathy Hibbard (HIBBAR), Bill Hutchinson (HUTCHI), Rick Ingersoll (RI, INGERS), Kathryn P. Ingraham (INGRAH), Jeremy Kaplan (KAPLAN), Jan Karpiniski (JAN), Dorothea Krull (KRULL), Mark Losleben (LOSLEB), Alexie McKechnie (ALEXIE, MCKECH), Carron Meaney (CARRON, MEANEY), Genice Moscitti (MASCIT, GENICE), Adeline Nunez (ADELIN, NUNEZ), Mark R. Opincaine (OPINCA), Roy Ozanne (ROY, OZANNE), Tom Perreault (PERREA, TP, TOMP, TOM, PERRAU), Tom Perreault and Rick Ingersoll (TP/RCI), Pritekel (PRITEK), Teri Sofarelli (SOFARE), Karen Southwick (KAREN), Craig Stockwell (CRAIG, STOCKW), Michael D. Taylor (TAYLOR, MIKET), Meri Walander (WALAND, MERI), and Jill Walford (WALFOR). Note that if a collector field contained "1/2c", then it was entered as JIMH. Note also that spelling variations could have been due to the fact that the individual completing the live specimen card in the field often was not the collector or could have been the result of illegibility of the card. If the collector could not be determined by the data entry personnel then the collector code was entered as XXXXXX.
The following are general comments with regard to entries associated with the date field:
Wherever possible, dates were "corrected" during data entry using handwriting, collectors' names, and card sequences as clues. If, for example, a card had the incorrect year listed and this was apparently the result of an error during field data recording, then a small note was made on the card by data entry personnel regarding the fact that the date was not entered as it appeared on the card. If, however, there was nothing to indicate that a card with an incongruous date belonged to the bundle in which it was found by data entry personnel, then it was moved to the appropriate bundle and entered with the cards in that bundle, i.e., the date entered was the same as it appeared on the live specimen card. It was estimated that there were less than a dozen such instances.
The following are general comments with regard to entries associated with the sex field:
If the sex was unknown or the field was blank, then "U" was entered in that column. Otherwise, "F" was entered for female and "M" entered for male specimens.
The following are general comments with regard to entries associated with the species field:
The following is a list of the species and the corresponding species codes: Clethorionomys gappi (CLEGAP), Eutamias minimus (EUTMIN), Eutamias umbrius (EUTUMB), Marmota flaviventris (MARFLA), Microtus longicaudus (MICLON), Microtus montanus (MICMON), Ochotona princeps (OCHPRI), Peromyscus maniculatus (PERMAN), Phenacomys intermedius (PHENIN), Sorex vagrans (SORVAG), Spermophilas lateralis (SPELAT), Thomomys talpoides (THOTAL), and Zapus princepus (ZAPPRI). When a full scientific name was not recorded in the species field, then the following codes were used: chipmunk (CHIPSP), horned lark (HOLARK), Sorex (SOREXS), vole (VOLESP), and white crowned sparrow (WCSPAR). There were a few cards contained in bundles labeled "Mice 1981", "Mice 1983", and "Pikas 1989" that did not have anything listed in the species field. The species codes used in these instances were ?MOUSE and ?PIKAS, respectively.
The following are general comments with regard to entries associated with the number field:
Usually, the characters "R" and "L" (for right and left ear tags, respectively) were not included in the number field during data entry, regardless of whether or not they appeared on the card. Character abbreviations for tag color, however, were included in the number during data entry. If, for example, the number on the live specimen card was listed as "orange 123" and "green 456", then the number entered was "O123G456". If there was an indication in the number field indicated the tagging to be a toe clip, then the number only was included during data entry; no special toe clip code was used during data entry. In cases where an additional note (e.g., in a new hand- writing) suggested that the original number was incorrect and supplied an alternative number, then this alternative number was the one used by data entry personnel.
The following are general comments with regard to entries associated with the weight field:
On some of the live specimen cards it was apparent that a tare weight (e.g., for "squeezers") and a total weight were listed near the weight field, but the difference had not actually been calculated on the card. In these cases, the difference was calculated and entered into the computer as the weight. Weight values associated with "?" or "heavy wind" comments were entered as they appeared on the card.
The following are general comments with regard to entries associated with the age fields:
If 2 of the age fields (e.g., adult and subadult) were checked, then both of these were entered as being positive (i.e., "1"). Presumably, this meant that the individual was intermediate in age between the 2 classes.
The following are general comments with regard to entries associated with the male and female sexual development characteristic fields: If 2 related sexual development characteristic fields (e.g., small and medium nipples) were checked, then both of these were entered as being positive (i.e., "1"). Presumably, this meant that the individual had, in this example, nipples intermediate between the 2 size classes or had nipples in each of the 2 size classes.
The following are general comments with regard to entries associated with the condition field:
The following is a list of condition codes that were used during data entry. The general or specific comments to which those codes apply are provided parenthetically: BUAN (bugs around anus), DALE (wet or damp and with injured or otherwise abnormal leg(s)), DAMP (wet or damp), DEAD (dead), EARS (injured, missing, or otherwise abnormal ear(s)), ESCA (escaped or "dropped while handling"), EXCE (excellent or great), FAIR (fair or fair-good), FLEA (fleas), FOCA (foaming at mouth but fairly calm), FOEA (foaming at mouth and injured or otherwise abnormal ear(s)), GASH (cuts or gashes on body), GODA (good but wet or damp), GOEA (good but with injured or otherwise abnormal ear(s)), GOES (good but escaped), GOFL (good but has fleas), GOLE (good but with injured or otherwise abnormal leg(s)), GONO (good but with injured or otherwise abnormal nose), GOOD (good, active, healthy, or OK), HYPO (hypothermic), LEGS (injured or otherwise abnormal leg(s)), LITT (birthing or litter-related comment), MITE (mites observed), MOUT (injured or otherwise abnormal mouth), NOEA (injured or otherwise abnormal nose and injured or otherwise abnormal ear(s)), NOSE (injured or otherwise abnormal nose), PODA (poor and wet or damp), POEA (poor with injured or otherwise abnormal ear(s)), POLE (poor with injured or otherwise abnormal leg(s)), PONO (poor with injured or otherwise abnormal nose), POOR (poor), SEEN (seen but not captured), TAIL (injured or otherwise abnormal tail), TAKE (taken or removed from the field), and VAGI (injured or otherwise abnormal vagina).
Detailed comments such as the source litter for the animal or where it went when released were omitted during data entry. Similarly, comments regarding the colony or population to which an animal might belong were not entered. Comments regarding the time of trapping or weather conditions were also disregarded during data entry. Most of the comments concerned the recapture status of the specimen. Consequently, data entry personnel developed a set of 3-character codes (and a column to contain them) to incorporate this information during data entry. If a comment indicated that the animal was a recapture (e.g., "recapture", "previously captured") and no year was given, it was assumed by data entry personnel to be for the same year and the code used was YYY. If a comment on the card indicated that the animal was a recapture from a previous year, then the code consisted of a "Y" followed by the final two digits of the year, e.g., "Y82" would be the code for an animal that had been previously trapped in 1982. If a comment on the card indicated that the animal was a recapture from more than 1 previous year, then the code consisted of the penultimate digit from the year (i.e., an "8" since all such occurrences were limited to the 1980s) was followed by the final digit in each of the years defining the range. An animal previously captured in 1982 and 1983, for example, would have been given a recapture code of "823". If a comment on the card indicated that the animal was new, then the recapture code was NEW. If a comment on the card indicated that the capture was the firts one for that animal for that year, then the recapture code was 1ST. If a comment indicated that the capture was not the first capture of the year for that animal (e.g., "2nd" or "3rd"), then the recapture code was YYY. If there were no comments regarding the recapture status, then the recapture code was NNN. The NNN code could be interpreted as suggestive that the animal was new or that no information was known/recorded about the recapture status. If a comment on the card indicated that the animal was retagged, had tags removed, or had lost tags (all of which also imply recapture), then the recapture code was YRT. The tag number code used by data entry personnel was generally  based on the new tag number. If a single live specimen card had been used for multiple captures of the same individual on a given day, then the all of the information on the card was entered for each capture, although the information might have varied among the entries. Unless information on the card suggested otherwise, for example, the recapture code was NNN for the first capture and YYY for all subsequent captures. If information on the card suggested that subsequent capture(s) were made in different trap(s), then the appropriate information was entered (in the trap number field). If, however, only 1 trap number was recorded on a live specimen card that contained information for multiple captures of the same animal on a given day, then the trap number was assumed to be "missing data" for all but the initial capture. The same protocol was applied if a single card was used for multiple captures of the same animal on different days, except that the entries based on such a card would have had different (re)capture dates. Also, if different weights were entered for each of the (re)capture dates, then the appropriate information was entered. If, however, only 1 weight was recorded on the live specimen card that contained information for multiple captures of the same animal for more than a single day, then the weight was assumed to be "missing data" for all but the initial capture. 
The fields for S[ection], T[ownship], R[ange], county, and state on the completed live specimen cards were usually left blank and no columns for these data were created for data entry. Since all of these live specimen cards were for a comparatively small portion of Niwot Ridge, it was presumed that this information would have been the same for all of the cards.
The following are general comments with regard to entries associated with the grid field:
The normal protocol was to enter the grid code exactly as it appeared on the card, with the exception that if the code exceeded 4 characters it was truncated. The following is a list of the grid codes that were used during data entry. The untruncated versions of the codes and/or descriptions, if known, are provided parenthetically: 16, 29, 53, 7.8, 73, 8, A, B, C, COMO, D, D1, D1-S or D-1S (near D-1 shack or cabin), DM (Dry Meadow), DMA (Dry Meadow A), DMB (Dry Meadow B), DOE, E, E2, ED1, EKFF (East Knoll Fellfield), EXP, F, FF (Fellfield), FFA (Fellfield A), FFB (Fellfield B), FFSM (Fellfield Small Mammal), FOOD (food additive), FSM, GRID, KIWI, LOCO (Lower Como), MARM (Marmot), MICO (Middle Como), MMA (Moist Meadow A), MMB (Moist Meadow B), MOUS, P/M, PIKA, PSM (Pika Small Mammal), RAK (Ridge above Kiwi), RD-1, RD1, RED1, ROAD, SADD (Saddle), SADL, SBA (Snowbed A), SBB (Snowbed B), SHTU (Shrub Tundra), SM, SMP, ST (Shrub Tundra), ST29 (stake 29), ST62 (stake 62), ST73 (stake 73), UPCO (Upper Como), UPIK (Upper Pika), UPSM (Upper Pika Small Mammal), WD1, WKNO (West Knoll), WLNO (low West Knoll), and WMA (Wet Meadow A). Evidently, some of these refer to sites rather than grids, but data entry personnel were not able to make these distinctions. Moreover, there were apparently inconsistencies in the abbreviations used by field personnel for the same location or grid. Again, data entry personnel made no attempt to resolve these inconsistencies. The bundles labeled "Kiwi Field Techniques" were entered with KIWI as the grid code, regardless of whether or not the grid field was blank on individual cards. Similarly, the bundles labeled "FFSM" and containing mice and vole data for 1984 were entered with FFSM as the grid code, although most of the cards were marked with FF in the grid field. The list that follows was extracted from Table 1 in Halfpenny et al. (1984) and includes the total grid areas. The number of traps and location description, separated by a semicolon, are provided parenthetically: 0.25-ha Dry Meadow A (25; 40 m south from Saddle grid stake 50 and then 40 m east), 0.25-ha Dry Meadow B (25; 40 m south of Saddle grid stake 79 and then 40 m east), 0.25-ha Fellfield A (25; southwest corner of FFSM grid, 40 m north of Saddle grid stake 10 and then 40 m east), 0.25-ha Fellfield B (25; grid runs 40 m on a 5-degree bearing, from a point 54.3 m from Saddle grid stake 50A on a 110-degree bearing, and then 40 m on a 95-degree bearing), 1-ha Fellfield Small Mammal (100; 90 m north from Saddle grid stake 10 and then 90 m east), 0.25-ha Moist Meadow A (25; grid runs 40 m on a 175-degree bearing, from a point 3.8 m from Saddle grid stake 7 on a 148-degree bearing, and then 40 m on a 265-degree bearing), 0.25-ha Moist Meadow B (25; southwest corner of Small Mammal grid, 40 m south of Saddle grid stake 35 and then 40 m east), 1-ha Pika Small Mammal (100; 90 m north from Saddle grid stake 1 and then 90 m west), 2550-m2 Shrub Tundra (25; center of SM grid, from Saddle grid stake 37, west border is 10 m west, east border is 20 m east, north border is 20 m north, and south border is 30 m south), 2-ha Small Mammal (200; between Saddle grid stakes 25, 45, 29, and 49), 0.25-ha Snowbed A (25; 40 m north from Saddle grid stake 13 and then 40 m east), 0.25-ha Snowbed B (25; 40 m west from Saddle grid stake 34 and then 40 m south), 0.5-ha Upper Pika Small Mammal (50; on top of West Knoll), and 2550-m2 Wet Meadow (25; northeast corner is 7.7 m from Saddle grid stake 7 on a 257-degree bearing, southeast border is formed by a 224-degree bearing from the northeast corner). Grids were marked at 10-m intervals with numbered aluminum tags nailed to the ground. Additional information (including establishment dates, dominant vegetation, and surface characteristics) about these grids and maps can be found in Halfpenny et al. (1984). 
The following are general comments with regard to entries associated with the trap number field:
There appeared to be major inconsistencies in the manner in which trap numbers were recorded. It seemed that in some cases an actual trap number was used, in other cases a grid location was used, and in still others, both were given. Trap numbers were entered exactly as they appeared on the live specimen card, although it is likely that 7A and A7 in the bundle labeled "Mice 1981", for example, were the same trap. Again, the user might want to consult the original live specimen cards to resolve these discrepancies.
The following are general comments with regard to entries associated with the habitat field:
The following is a list of the habitat codes that were used during data entry. The corresponding habitat descriptions are provided parenthetically: ACBI (Acomastylis, bistort), ACBT (Acomastylis, bistort, Trifolium), ACME (Acomastylis, Mertensia), ACOM (Acomastylis), ACRO (Acomastylis, rock), ACTR (Acomostylis, Trifolium), ASPE (aspen forest), AVBA (avens, bare), AVCL (avens, clover), AVEN (avens), AVRC (avens, Retensia [Mertensia?], clover), BAVE (bare, vegetated), BICA (bistort, Carex), CABC (Carex, bistort, clover), CAGE (Carex, Geum), CLOV (clover), DMKO (dry meadow, Kobresia), DRME (dry meadow), FELL (fellfield), FFCP (fellfield, cushion plants), FFTA (fellfield, talus), GEAC (Geum, Acomastylis), GEBI (Geum, bistort), GEBT (Geum, bistort, talus), GECL (Geum, clover), GERO (Geum, rock), GETA (Geum, talus), GETK (Geum, Trifolium, Kobresia), GETR (Geum, Trifolium), GEUM (Geum), KOAB (Kobresia, Acomastylis, bistort), KOAC (Kobresia, Acomastylis), KOBR (Kobresia), KOGB (Kobresia, Geum, bistort), LIPI (limber pine), MEAD (meadow), MOME (moist meadow), PITR (pika trap), RAGE (Ranunculus, Geum), RIPA (riparian), ROCK (rock), ROKO (rock, Kobresia), ROME (rocky meadow), SACA (Salix, Caltha), SALX (Salix), SEDG (sedge), SHRU (shrub), SHTU (shrub, tundra), SIBA (Sibbaldia), SITR (Sibbaldia, Trifolium), SNOW (snow), TAAC (talus, Acomastylis rossii), TALU (talus), TAME (talus, meadow), TAST (talus, solifluction terrace), TRIF (Trifolium), TRKO (Trifolium, Kobresia), TRRO (Trifolium, rock), TUND (tundra), VERO (vegetated, rock), WEME (wet meadow), WICL (willow, clover), WICT (willow, clover, tall grass), WIGE (willow, Geum), WILL (willow), and WISD (willow, sage, Deschampsia). It should be noted that data entry personnel created these codes based on actual habitat descriptions on the live specimen cards. Because field personnel were not consistent in their terminology and because data entry personnel were not familiar with many of the common and scientific names, 2 or 3 different codes may be equivalent. For instance, it can be presumed that "Acomastylis", "Geum", and "avens" all refer to Acomastylis (Geum) rossii.
The following are specific comments regarding the entry of the data on the individual or groups of live specimen cards:
The grid field on cards in the "Gophers 1982" bundle had a number listed with coordinates (latitude and longitude) in parentheses. Only the number was entered as the grid code. The tag numbers were not entered as there were none. Gophers were dyed instead of being tagged.
The number for a female marmot captured on 15 August 1984 in trap #14C was 229247. A comment in the "Other:" field was "Diff wts from 8/15 & 8/16 due to diff scales".
The number for a female marmot captured on 16 August 1984 in trap C was listed as "229-247".  Above the first 3 digits was written "259" and so the number entered was 259247.
The number for a female Peromyscus captured on 13 September 1981 in trap B9 was 178. A comment in the "Other:" field was "NEM; Two mice in trap!! with #168". Nothing was entered for 168.
The number for a female Peromyscus captured on 7 November 1981 in trap J9 was 193, but a number of comments underneath indicated that the number might be something else (e.g., 163). It was entered as 193.
The number for a male Peromyscus captured on 7 November 1981 in trap A6 was 192. A comment underneath and circled in red indicated that the correct number might be 171 (or something else). It was entered as 192.
The number for a female P. maniculatus captured on 7 August 1982 in trap D9 was 336. Grid was listed as "RD1 ED1" and entered as "RED1".
The number for a female P. maniculatus captured on 28 July 1983 in trap I10 was 185. There were numerous comments on the back of the card suggesting that this individual had previously been 157 and was captured on several instances in mid June.
The bundle of cards labeled "Mice and Voles 1984 FFA" were entered with FFA as the grid code and trap numbers as the numbers immediately following "FFA" on the card.
For many of the cards in the "Mice 1986" bundle, the trap number was listed with additional information provided parenthetically, e.g., "E-1 (FFA-21)". In these cases, the initial number was used as the trap number --- "E1" in the example provided.
The number for a male captured on 7 July 1981 was R312Y313. There was nothing in the species field but it was entered as pika because it was in the middle of the bundled stack labeled "Pika 1981". The same protocol was applied for an individual (Y316Y317) captured on 7 July 1981, female individual (Y357G359) captured on 14 July 1981, and male individual (R324R366) captured (in traps L and 02) on 15 July 1981. 
The number for a pika captured on 14 August 1981 in trap 1 was O252O253. Numerous comments on back of card suggested that some or all of the information on this card was incorrect. Nevertheless, the data were entered.
The number for a female pika captured on 6 July 1983 in trap #60 was 423 and was entered as such. A comment in the "Other:" field indicated that the number was originally O423.
The number for a male pika captured on "22 July 1982" in trap #7 was O450B451. This card was in the middle of the bundled stack labeled "Pika 1983" and so the date was entered as 22 July 1983. Handwriting was used to make this decision.
The number for a male pika captured on "8/3/81" in trap #50 was R712O713. This card was in the middle of the bundled stack labeled "Pika 1983" and so the date was entered as 3 August 1983. Handwriting was used to make this decision.
The number for a female pika captured in traps #67 and #12 was 461W. The date field was blank. This card was in the middle of the bundled stack labeled "Pika 1983" and was surrounded by cards with a "8/15/83" date and so the date was entered as 15 August 1983.
A comment in the "Other:" field for a female pika captured on 17 July 1984 in trap #DEN was "Den trap renamed #00."
A comment in the "Other:" field for a male pika captured on 19 July 1984 in trap #286 was "missing left ear; think it was 0715." The number for this individual was listed as 34.
A comment in the "Other:" field for a female pika captured on 1 August 1984 in trap #66 was illegible but seemed to refer to tagging and recapture status. The number for the individual was entered as 16.
Several of the cards in the bundled stack labeled "Pika 1985", had trap number fields containing "Den B" or "DenC"; these were entered as DNB and DNC, respectively.
The number for a female pika captured on 31 May 1985 in trap #20 was B1009R1010. The number for the individual was entered as 10091010. The tag in the left ear (R1010) was subsequently torn out and replaced on 30 June with R114. Thus, the number was entered as 1009R114 on this and subsequent dates. A comment in the "Other:" field on the 31 May 1985 date for this individual was illegible.
The number for a male pika captured on 31 August 1985 in trap Den C and #69 was O75. A comment in the condition field was "Lost O108 in trap." It was assumed that this was a recapture (for 1985) and was retagged.
The number for a female pika captured on 11 August 1986 in trap #12 was 170. Comments on the card were "tag gone" and "lost B143 in rt ear" and it was assumed that this was a recapture (for 1986) and was retagged.
The number for a female pika captured on 13 August 1986 initially in trap #66 was G183W317 and it was recaptured on 4 more occasions on the same date. "Wt" was listed as 144 gm in the appropriate space, but as 146 gm in the "Other:" field. Therefore, weight for the final time (1915 hr) was listed as 146, with all of the earlier weights listed as 144.
The number for a female pika captured on 20 August 1987 in trap #28 was W1013W1012. The number for the individual was entered as 10131012.
A male pika captured on 17 August 1990 in trap #56 and tagged W385R384 had an additional tag (679 without a washer) added to the right ear.
A female pika captured twice on 19 August 1990 in traps #4 and #56 was entered as number Y590W591, because of comments on cards, although the original number on the card was Y598W591.
The number for a female Clethrionomys gapperi captured on 30 August 1982 was 781. There was no trap number or grid provided. Because it was among cards from the COMO grid, COMO was entered as the grid.

\type

statistical

\header

COL1. label=collector, type=string, units=none, missing value indicator=XXXXXX, minimum=, maximum=, precision=, definition=collector

COL2. label=date, type=string, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=, maximum=, precision=, definition=date (yyyy-mm-dd)

COL3. label=sex, type=string, units=none, missing value indicator=U, minimum=, maximum=, precision=, definition=sex

COL4. label=species, type=string, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=, maximum=, precision=, definition=species

COL5. label=id_num, type=string, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=, maximum=, precision=, definition=animal identification number

COL6. label=weight, type=real, units=gram, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=, maximum=, precision=, definition=weight

COL7. label=adult, type=integer, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=1, maximum=1, precision=, definition=age: adult

COL8. label=subadult, type=integer, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=1, maximum=1, precision=, definition=age: subadult

COL9. label=juvenile, type=integer, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=1, maximum=1, precision=, definition=age: juvenile

COL10. lable=M_testes_abd, type=integer, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=1, maximum=1, precision=, definition=male testes position: abdominal

COL11. label=M_testes_inguin, type=integer, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=1, maximum=1, precision=, definition=male testes position: inguinal

COL12. label=M_testes_scrot, type=integer, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=1, maximum=1, precision=, definition=male testes position: scrotal

COL13. label=F_vagina_imperf, type=integer, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=1, maximum=1, precision=, definition=female vaginal condition: imperforate

COL14. label=F_vagina_perf, type=integer, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=1, maximum=1, precision=, definition=female vaginal condition: perforate

COL15. label=F_vagina_plug, type=integer, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=1, maximum=1, precision=, definition=female vaginal condition: plug

COL16. label=F_nipple_sm, type=integer, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=1, maximum=1, precision=, definition=female nipple size: small

COL17. label=F_nipple_med, type=integer, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=1, maximum=1, precision=, definition=female nipple size: medium

COL18. label=F_nipple_lg, type=integer, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=1, maximum=1, precision=, definition=female nipple size: large

COL19. label=F_lact_cond, type=integer, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=1, maximum=1, precision=, definition=female lactating condition

COL20. label=F_preg_cond, type=integer, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=1, maximum=1, precision=, definition=female pregnancy condition

COL21. label=condition, type=string, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=, maximum=, precision=, definition=condition of animal

COL22. label=recap_stat, type=string, units=none, missing value indicator=NNN, minimum=, maximum=, precision=, definition=recapture status

COL23. label=grid, type=string, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=, maximum=, precision=, definition=grid

COL24. label=trap_num, type=string, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=, maximum=, precision=, definition=trap number

COL25. label=habitat, type=string, units=none, missing value indicator=NaN, minimum=, maximum=, precision=, definition=habitat

\data

http://niwot.colorado.edu/data_csvs/smammals.jh.data.csv

\log

The documentation section of this file was developed from the NWT LTER Data Directory (Symphony files DDABSTRA.WR1, DDDOCUME.WR1, DDMASTER.WR1, DDVARIAB.WR1; last updated 16 December 1991) by Susan Kindig and Rick Ingersoll in mid February 1993. Extensive additional comments as well as the header sections were provided by Mike Hartman, Mike Sannes, and RI in late April and early May of 1994. The data were appended to the data section on 12 May 1994 and the file was put under sccs control then as well.[RCI 12 May 1994] Edited title and keywords for inclusion in core populations data sets.[HCH 13 April 2010] Labels were shortened and definitions added.[HCH 09 September 2015]

